# Chapter Three: A Brief History (II)

## 3.1 The Industrial Revolution and the Chartist Movement

### 3.1.1 The Struggle with France

While England was suffering from revolution, France, under Louis XIV, was achieving a dominant position in Europe. With internal conflict ended, England turned its attention abroad. In 1689 it joined with Holland and several German states in the War of the Grand Alliance against France. The war spread to America, where it was called King William's War. It marked the beginning of a long struggle to decide whether France or England was to control India and North America.

When William died, in 1702, Louis XIV proclaimed James Stuart, son of James II, king of England, Scotland, and Ireland. Parliament, however, had provided that if William and Mary had no children, the crown should pass to Anne, a Protestant, daughter of James II by his first wife. As soon as Anne came to the throne in 1702, England entered upon another war with France to break up a threatened combination of France and Spain. This was called in Europe the War of the Spanish Succession. In America it was known as Queen Anne's War. The Duke of Marlborough led the English, Dutch, and Germans to brilliant victories, and the Treaty of Utrecht (1713) gave England important territories (all Nova Scotia and Newfoundland) in the New World. The most notable event in Anne's reign was the union of England with Scotland. Since 1603 the two nations had been loosely associated under the same king. The Act of Union (1707) united them in a single kingdom, called Great Britain, and joined their parliaments. Thereafter the government and parliament in London were called British rather than English.

The Stuart line came to an end when Anne died, since none of her 17 children survived her. She was succeeded in 1714 by George I, a prince of the House of Hanover, a small state in Germany. George did not speak English, and he was so wrapped up in his beloved Hanover that he took little interest in British affairs. He soon began to stay away from meetings of his inner council, or cabinet, and left the government in the hands of Sir Robert Walpole, the able Whig leader. His son, George II, who ruled 1727–1760, also stayed away from meetings of his ministers. Walpole made himself supreme in the government, selected his colleagues, and insisted they work with him or leave the cabinet. He thus became the first prime minister. Walpole promoted trade and commerce and strove to avoid war. But in 1739 the British people became aroused over the story of Robert Jenkins, a sea captain, who claimed the Spaniards had boarded his ship and cut off his ear. Walpole was persuaded to declare war against Spain in 1739—the War of Jenkins' Ear. He resigned when this war merged into another Continental war, the War of the Austrian Succession, in America called King George's War. When peace was made, in 1748, the real issue—whether France or Britain was to prevail in India and North America—was still unsettled.

The struggle with France was renewed in the Seven Years' War, which broke out in 1756. This war brought to the fore a leader of genius, William Pitt, earl of Chatham. He carried on the struggle against France in America, Africa, and India, as well as in Europe and on the sea. When the war came to an end, the Treaty of Paris was signed in 1763. According to the Treaty, France ceded Canada and her American possessions east of the Mississippi, with the exception of New Orleans and gave up four of her West Indian islands, as well as her African possessions. Spain, who had joined the war on the sides of France, ceded Florida to England together with all her possessions east of the Mississippi. The war cost France almost all its territory in North America and India and established Britain as the world's chief colonial power.

> **William Pitt the Elder**, lauded British leader during the war, confirming Britain's status as the world's dominant colonial power.

In 1789 the French Revolution erupted. French citizens rose against their monarch, Louis XVI, eliminated the ancient legal distinctions based on social class, and established a republican government. The French revolutionaries invited all of the peoples of Europe to follow their example. Conservative monarchs throughout Europe were hostile toward the revolution. George III expelled the French envoy. Within a few years wars broke out between France and a number of European powers. In 1793 France declared war on Britain and Britain promptly joined the coalition of European monarchs against the new French republic. The war dragged on without much result until the young general Napoleon Bonaparte began to win amazing victories. By 1797 Britain was left to carry on the war alone. Britain, weak on land, was supreme on the sea. Admiral Horatio Nelson's victory of the Nile (1798) gave the British navy control of the Mediterranean and secured the route to India. At Trafalgar (1805) Nelson destroyed the French fleet. Napoleon, victorious on the Continent, was unable to invade the island kingdom; so he sought to ruin the "race of shopkeepers" by forbidding Europe to trade with Britain. In response Britain instituted a blockade of goods going into or out of European ports controlled by Napoleon. The United States, exasperated by Britain's interference with its commerce, declared war on Britain in 1812. After Napoleon invaded Russia in 1812 and suffered a disastrous defeat, Britain mobilized its forces for a land war and joined a coalition with Russia, Austria, and Prussia. The center of fighting shifted to Spain, where a British force under the Duke of Wellington successfully fought its way across the country and invaded France in 1813. Two years later Wellington led the coalition of forces that decisively defeated Napoleon at the Battle of Waterloo and ended the French revolutionary wars. Before the year ended, a British ship carried off Napoleon to an island prison. The Congress of Vienna, which followed the end of the Napoleonic Wars, was a great diplomatic victory for Britain. France was left intact but its continental neighbors achieved security of their borders. The treaty created a balance of power among the nations of Europe that led to 40 years of peace on the continent. With peace established in Europe, Britain was free to spend its energy and resources on expanding its overseas empire.

Triumph over France brought Great Britain national glory and financial profit. The empire expanded and British control over sea routes was made secure. The increased demand for British goods stimulated commerce and quickened the pace of the Industrial Revolution. British blast furnaces and textile mills supplied munitions and clothes not only for the armies of Great Britain but for its allies as well. The war swelled the fortunes of landlords, merchants, and manufacturers. Meanwhile, laissez-faire (from a French term, meaning "let it alone"), the rough beginning of a free market economy, was becoming the order of the day in industry.

> **Portrait of the Duke of Wellington** by Francisco Goya, 1812–1814

### 3.1.2 The American Revolution

Before the Seven Years' War ended, George III began his 60-year reign, 1760–1820. Determined to "be a king" but quite unfit to be one, he got rid of Pitt and put his own Tory friend, Lord North in power. Britain's role in the imperial wars cost the country a great deal, and the national debt rose higher than it had ever been before. In order to lower the national debt, the Tory government imposed new taxes on the American colonies. The colonists insisted the British Parliament had no right to tax them without their consent. Beginning in 1763 Parliament passed laws to tax colonial commodities such as sugar, glass, cider, and tea. The most controversial of these duties was the Stamp Act of 1765, which taxed legal documents and publications. Americans not only complained about the cost of these taxes, but also questioned the British government's right to impose them. In 1775, 13 American colonies rebelled against British rule. The American Revolution gave France and Spain an opportunity to strike back at the British Empire. Both supported the American colonists with money and ultimately declared war on Britain. The British army was unprepared for war in North America, and it suffered a series of humiliating defeats, culminating in the surrender of British general Charles Cornwallis to American forces at Yorktown, Virginia, in 1781. The Royal Navy fared no better. When hostilities ended, Florida was returned to Spain, and the 13 rebellious colonies achieved independence as the United States of America.

> **George III in Coronation Robes**, Portrait by Allan Ramsay, 1762

The loss of the American colonies came at great cost to Britain's self-image. George III was blamed for the disaster, and he decided to withdraw from direct control of government. Parliament regained its leadership. William Pitt the Younger became prime minister in 1783 and held the position for 17 years. In 1800 Pitt succeeded in bringing Ireland into a union with Great Britain similar to that between England and Scotland. The Act of Union went into force January 1, 1801, creating the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. The mass of the Irish, however, being Catholics, were still excluded from the government because George III allowed only Church-of-England Irish to sit in Parliament.

### 3.1.3 The Industrial Revolution and Its Impact

#### The Industrial Revolution

The development of industry in Britain was a long and gradual process. Industrialization took place earlier and more rapidly in Britain than anywhere else because existing conditions were favorable in England. A system of internal waterways and canals and the absence of physical barriers to trade made the transport of goods less difficult than in other nations. Coalfields and thick forests, located conveniently close to large deposits of metal ores, provided fuel to power the furnaces that produced iron. Thriving commercial banks provided financing for investments in industrial plants and machinery. Advances in agriculture also contributed to the industrialization process.

The first phase of industrialization centered on the production of cotton clothing. At the beginning of the 18th century Britain still imported finished cotton cloth from India. Soon domestic manufacturing reversed this flow, and England became the world's primary supplier of cotton cloth. Two developments made this possible: the availability of cheap raw cotton from Egypt and America, and the invention of new machines that enabled workers to spin more thread and weave more cloth. One of these new machines was known as the spinning jenny invented by James Hargreaves in 1765. It used foot pedals to control the spinning of multiple threads. This device allowed a worker to spin 200 times as much thread in 1815 as could be spun 50 years earlier. Another mechanical device, the flying shuttle, quickly and automatically passed thread through a loom, the device on which cloth is woven. This flying shuttle enabled one person to operate a loom, whereas previously it had taken an entire team of workers. The operation of machinery became more efficient and profitable with the addition of waterproof and later the perfection of the rotary steam engine by Scottish inventor James Watt in 1784. Cotton production soared. By 1815 Britain was exporting 100 times the amount of cotton it had exported half a century earlier. Cotton became its most important product. With the introduction of machinery, factories became the site of organized production of textiles, replacing small-scale manufacture in the home.

> **A Watt steam engine** was fuelled primarily by coal that propelled the Industrial Revolution in Great Britain and the world.

Iron was the miracle product of industrialization. Engineers used it to build the machines that powered production and ultimately the rails and engines that powered distribution. Iron had long been refined in England in furnaces that used charcoal as fuel. This process, known as smelting, involved heating iron ore to high temperatures to remove most of the impurities. However, charcoal left some impurities in the iron, which made it difficult to cast the iron into bars. Abraham Darby, an English iron manufacturer, discovered that smelting with coke, a purified form of coal, made possible the production of a better product. Newly developed techniques allowed the iron to be heated and stirred in great vats until impurities had been burned off. Factory workers then fed the cooling iron through rolling machines that formed it into bars. By 1850 English manufacturers were producing more than half of the world's iron.

The most important use of this enormous output of iron was in building railroads. The railroads developed as a result of the technological advances made during the Industrial Revolution. The iron factories produced high-grade material suitable for constructing train engines and tracks. Skilled ironworkers provided machine parts of exact sizes. Inventors put Watt's steam engine to use, first to pump water from mines, then to drive pistons up and down, and finally to generate the rotary motion that propelled the wheels of trains. In 1829 engineer and inventor George Stephenson created an engine that could pull three times its weight and outrun a horse. The following year the first important railway opened, carrying coal and bulk goods between Manchester and Liverpool. It soon carried more people than products. Passenger travel by rail was faster, cheaper, and more comfortable than travel by coach. The introduction of the railroad changed forever concepts of speed and distance that were centuries old. Hundreds of independent railway companies sprang up. They invested millions of pounds to employ hundreds of thousands of laborers to lay thousands of miles of iron track. All railroad lines ultimately connected to London, the commercial center of the nation.

> **George Stephenson** of England built the Rocket with his son, Robert, in 1829. It was the fastest steam locomotive of its time, with a speed of 36 miles (58 kilometers) per hour.

#### The Impact of Industrialization

Industrialization transformed nearly every aspect of British life. Firstly, productivity was greatly increased. By 1830 Britain produced half of Europe's iron and cotton, three-quarters of its coal, and nearly all of its steam engines. The English supplied the technological expertise for engineering in other countries, and they planned the railway systems for nearly all of Europe. Steam-powered ships made the world a smaller place in the same way that railroads had shrunk the British Isles. Bulk cargoes were now easily moved around the globe, and wealth poured into London and the commercial ports in western Britain. By rough estimates, the per capita wealth of England tripled from 1801 to 1851, a remarkable growth considering that the population doubled. Industrialization consolidated Britain's position as the greatest power in the world.

Secondly, with the industrial revolution, population was more and more concentrated in towns and cities. While the population as a whole grew by 100 percent between 1801 and 1851, the population of towns such as Liverpool and Manchester grew by 1,000 percent. London, which had about 1 million inhabitants by 1801, grew to more than 2.3 million by 1850. More remarkably, 9 towns had populations of more than 100,000, and more than 50 had populations of more than 20,000. By 1850 the urban population was half of the whole population of England.

Thirdly, this increase in wealth as the Industrial Revolution, however, did not benefit the poor. The rapid growth of capitalism caused miseries and disasters among the working people. Men and women toiled 12 to 18 hours a day in mines and factories. Wages were at starvation levels. Child labor was widespread. As a result of the introduction of machinery, unskilled workers, mostly women and children displaced handicraftsmen and skilled workers. Working and living conditions were horrible for the workers. Child labor was prevalent in Britain because children were a cheap source of labor for employers and easier to manage. They were forbidden to hold meetings, to organize unions, even to publish pamphlets. When workers rioted and smashed the new machines, the government made machine breaking a capital crime. In 1811, fourteen Luddites were put to death in Yorkshire after their destruction of two stocking frames. In 1819 one of Britain's largest public demonstrations was held in Manchester. Between 50,000 and 60,000 people appealed for political and economic reform. Government cavalry troops attacked the crowd. Eleven people died, and more than 400 sustained injuries in what came to be known as the Peterloo Massacre. This event was critical in the early history of labor organization in Britain; many moderate Britons were outraged at the government's action and gave their support to the emerging labor movement.

### 3.1.4 The Chartist Movement

The factory system established by industrialization made tremendous changes in the social structure. Two new classes had appeared—the capitalists, who owned the factories and machines, and the mass of the workers, who were dependent upon the capitalists for employment. Large manufacturing cities had risen in the north, close to the coalfields. Many of these cities had no representation in Parliament because no new boroughs had been created to send up members since the time of Charles II. In the south of England Tory proprietors of boroughs with few or no inhabitants (called pocket boroughs or rotten boroughs) continued to send representatives. When William IV began his short reign in 1830, the reform of Parliament had by now become the burning issue. Extreme Tories, led by the Duke of Wellington, stood fast against it. Reform groups in Parliament, including the moderate Tories, drew together and supported Earl Grey, the Whig leader. Wellington's government fell and the Whigs came into power. In 1832 Lord John Russell introduced a strong reform bill which was passed as the Great Reform Act. It created 43 new boroughs and deprived the rotten boroughs of their representatives in Parliament. The battle for universal suffrage, however, was still to be fought. The Reform Act slightly increased the number of voters by lowering the property qualifications; but the mass of the working people were still too poor to vote. Their living and working conditions were made worse by a series of bad harvests from 1837 to 1840. They came to realize that only by securing enough representation in Parliament could they force the government to pass the law in favor of the poor. This led to the outbreak of the Chartist Movement.

> **The Great Chartist Meeting on Kennington Common, London in 1848**

In 1837, workers in London, organized in the London Working Men's Association, submitted a petition to Parliament as a result of widespread dissatisfaction with the Reform Bill of 1832 and the Poor Law of 1834. Later the 1,250,000 persons signed a petition to Parliament requesting that the charter be enacted into law. When Parliament again rejected the charter, the Chartists planned direct action in the form of a general strike. The strike failed, but an insurrection broke out in Monmouthshire in November 1839, and many Chartist leaders were arrested and imprisoned. Chartism was in a period of decline until 1848, when another petition was sent to Parliament. Despite a large public demonstration, the charter was again rejected. The Chartist movement gradually disintegrated thereafter, but all the programs it advocated, except the demand for annual parliamentary elections, eventually became law. Meanwhile an Anti-Corn Law League had been formed in 1836, to campaign for the free entry of foreign wheat to feed the hungry poor. Sir Robert Peel, the Conservative prime minister, was finally converted to their view; and in 1846 he put through Parliament the famous bill repealing the Corn Laws.

> **The People's Charter**

### 3.1.5 Parliamentary Reform

The Reform Act created 43 new boroughs and deprived the rotten boroughs of their representatives in Parliament. The battle for universal suffrage, however, was still to be fought. The Reform Act slightly increased the number of voters by lowering the property qualifications; but the mass of the working people were still too poor to vote.

During the 1830s the Tories dropped their somewhat discredited name and became known as the Conservative party. The free-trade Conservatives gradually merged with the Whigs, who were to become the new Liberal party. Liberalism in the 19th century meant individualism. The true Liberal of that day championed freedom of thought and religion, freedom of trade, freedom of contract between the individual employer and the individual workman, and unrestricted competition. The party was made up chiefly of the industrial middle class.

The Reform Act of 1832 had benefited only the middle class. In 1867 Parliament took another long step in the direction of democracy by putting through the second Reform Act. This gave the vote to almost all adult males in the towns. The bill had been introduced by Benjamin Disraeli, a Conservative. Nevertheless the new voters, many of them workingmen, supported William Gladstone, Liberal leader. With Gladstone's first and greatest ministry, 1868–1874, an era of reform set in. The Education Act of 1870 set up elementary schools financed in part by the government. In the same year competitive examinations were introduced for employment in the civil service. The Trade Union Act of 1871 gave full legal recognition to trade unions. In 1872 the secret ballot was introduced in parliamentary elections. During Gladstone's second ministry, 1880–1885, a third Reform Bill was enacted, in 1884. This gave rural voters the same voting privileges as the townspeople.



## Chapter Three: Exercises

**I. Fill in the following blanks with proper words or expressions.**

1. The British Industrial Revolution first began in the __________ industry.

2. __________ invented the "spinning Jenny" in 1765.

3. In 1800 __________ succeeded in bringing Ireland into a union with Great Britain similar to that between England and Scotland.

4. In 1815 __________ led the coalition of forces that decisively defeated Napoleon at the Battle of Waterloo and ended the French revolutionary wars.

5. In 1837, workers in London, organized in the London Working Men's Association, submitted a petition to Parliament, which was known as __________.

6. __________ proposed by Lord John Russell in 1832, created 43 new boroughs and deprived the rotten boroughs of their representatives in Parliament.

7. In 1944, British forces participated in the __________ which landed Allied troops in France.

8. To meet the threat of Soviet aggression, Britain joined __________ formed in 1949 and expanded its armament production.

9. __________, who had been the Conservative party leader since 1975, became Britain's first woman prime minister.

10. In April 1998 __________ was signed, which authorized the creation of a semiautonomous assembly for Northern Ireland to replace direct rule of the province by the United Kingdom.

**II. Explain the following terms.**

1. The Seven Years' War

2. The People's Charter

3. The Industrial Revolution

4. Thatcherism

**III. Discuss the following questions.**

1. What were the consequences of the British Industrial Revolution?

2. How did the British Empire fall?